---
title: Investing
position: 1
format_class: resource
section: resource-cards
no_date: true
status: current
lead: For long-term growth, invest in one, low-cost, diversified total market fund.
link: 
source: internal
---



**EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:**
**

The purpose of retirement saving and investing is to set money aside today in order to receive future income when employment income is reduced or ends.  In this effort, investors are faced with two seemingly contradictory goals for that future income. The first goal is to secure at least a minimum level of income with certainty. The second is to achieve a much greater level of income. But aspiring to a higher level of income entails taking investment risks. Taking investment risks means the results cannot be certain.

Both goals can be realized using the simplest possible strategy that explicitly addresses both. A portion of the investor’s portfolio can be allocated to riskless assets, sufficient to guarantee a minimum level of future income, while the remainder is allocated to risky assets that appear likely – but not guaranteed – to provide a higher income.

A benefit of this strategy is that it can be engaged in at the lowest possible cost to the investor, an average total cost of less than one-tenth of a percent of assets per year. This can be compared with the cost that the average investor pays, which is 10 to 30 times as much. Paying that much in investment fees can cost the investor half or more of the investor’s future income, far more than has ever been lost in long-term stock market declines.**


Most investors invest in risky assets. Stock and bond funds and similar investments are risky and can experience severe declines at any time. When investors’ stock and bond portfolios decline sharply in value, investors can become very nervous. Their nervousness is due to the fact that they don’t know how low the value of their portfolios can go. During a sharp decline, it can feel as though there is no limit to the fall. If a portfolio’s value can suddenly decline by 20% in a month, why could it not fall by 20% each month for a series of months, leaving the investor with practically nothing? There is no assured floor to that decline, no guarantee that their portfolio will be worth anything at all.
Risky assets can even experience severe declines over long periods of time. But in the developed economies in the world, true disaster scenarios for risky assets extending over long periods of time, such as multiple decades, have been very rare. In fact, losses in the value of a diversified stock portfolio persisting over multiple decades have never been anywhere near as great as the losses to a portfolio incurred by paying a 1% annual fee to an investment advisor or manager over the same time period. That is why the best advice when a decline occurs is to take the long term view and ignore it, however steep it may be, assuming that it is only part of normal market fluctuations.
Nevertheless, like your house catching on fire, a disaster scenario for risky assets remains a possibility, even if it has only a very small chance of occurring. Just as a homeowner purchases fire insurance in order to salvage something as a safety net in case of a disastrous fire, an investor should purchase insurance as a safety net against the remote possibility of a disaster befalling the investor’s risky assets.
It is reasonable to set this safety net insurance at the level that would provide the bare minimum income needed during the investor’s retirement. On the small chance that all risky investments permanently lose so much value that they will fail to provide this minimum income, the safety-net asset willcan do so.
Even a low floor, one that guarantees at least a minimum level of financial security economic survival, can help mitigate the panic that an investor feels and can provide some assurance when such a decline occurs; and such sharp declines have been recurring incidents in stock market history. A homeowner without fire insurance as a safety net might be too nervous about the possibility of a fire even to cook at home, for fear that a mishap will leave the homeowner destitute. Similarly, having an investment safety net can reassure investors, mitigating their concerns whenever their risky asset portfolios take a sharp dip – something that will surely happen sometime during the course of multiple decades of investing – and enabling them to remain invested some of their funds in the risky assets that are likely to provide them yet greater future income.
That is why we advocate as our basic approach to investing the so-called safety-net-plus investment planning process. In the safety-net-plus investment planning process, the investor first determines what bare minimum income will be necessary for threshold basic financialeconomic survival. If the investor finds it difficult to identify such a number, this figure can be estimated using a living wage calculator such as the one on this web site.
The plan then determines how much of the investor’s investments – including current assets and future contributions – should be invested in riskless securities (should we consistently use “safety net assets”?  whatever the answer, I think we should be rigidly consistent in order to mitigate term confusion)in order to assure that minimum future income. The riskless securities consist of either or both U.S. Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) and inflation-protected annuities.
The remainder of the investor’s investments is invested in a broadly diversified risky portfolio of U.S. and, potentially,  internationalglobal stocks. These are held for the long term in one or two ultra-low-cost stock index funds for the long term. Since the TIPS and annuities provide the desired hedge against longevity and inflation risks, lower-risk investments such as bond funds are unnecessary.
Insurance and investments
Normally we think of insurance and investment as separate things. But certain forms of  insurance shouldcan be regarded as an investment too. With an investment, you pay money upfront and receive payments later. The amount and duration of the payments to be received are more or less uncertain. When you invest in fixed income, like bonds, and hold those assets to maturity, the fixed payments are reasonably sure to be received, unless the borrower defaults. But if the bonds are in a portfolio that is rolled over regularly and replaced with new bonds, as in a bond mutual fund, the portfolio’s value is subject to market risk. When you invest in risk assets/equities, the payments, especially the payments when the investment is sold later, are highly uncertain.
The same is true of insurance. When you buy fire insurance on your home, you make a payment upfront. You may or may not receive a payment later. There might be less than a one in a thousand chance that there will be a fire and you will receive a payment. But if you do receive it, it can be large. Because of the low likelihood, tThe average rate of return on this investment is actually negative. But most people will purchase it anyway, because if you don’t, and your house burns down, you may find yourself destitute, or very much less well off than you had planned. The insurance provides a safety net in case of a disastrous event. It is an investment that is worth the cost, in spite of extremely low expected return on investment.
Focus on your future income, not assets
Most investment planning places the value of investment assets at the center. But this is not what concerns the investor. The investor is concerned with cash flow (income) to be received from the investments as much as several decades in the future. In the case of an individual investor as opposed to an institutional investor like an endowment or pension fund, the concern is with cash income to be received by the investor and the investor’s family over a finite period of time in the future, but the time period is still often measured in decades.
A focus on assets is a focus on an unreal figure. It is a figure that can fluctuate wildly from one short time period to the next. It is a figure that does not directly represent any real-world need, since it is only meaningful to a consumer if all the assets are liquefied and converted into cash at the moment of valuation.
The safety-net-plus investment planning process focuses on future income. It’s goal is to secures a minimalum desired future income by investing a portion of both the current portfolio and ongoing contributions in what we call safety net assets/riskless investments. The remainder of the portfolio, that is invested in risky assets, will produce an uncertain additional stream of income in the future. Projections of a range of that additional that future income can be estimated up to a level of probability using mathematical techniques such as Monte Carlo simulation and historical returns, given a set of reasonable assumptions about the degree of uncertainty.
Possibility of raising the safety net in the future
As time progresses, the investor can rest assured that, even when there are sharp drops in the investor’s risky asset/equity/stock portfolio, at least a specified minimum level of future income is guaranteed. It is much more likely, however, that the risky asset portfolio will increase substantially in value over one or two or more decades rather than decline. This will cause the investor to anticipate that a level of income will be available later that is greater than – possibly much greater than – the minimum guaranteed income.
It is important to remember, though, that the value of the risky portfolio is a paper value only. Its value, however high, is not guaranteed. At any given time, itt may suffer a significant and sudden declinevery well subsequently decline, possibly by a large percentage. Thus, wWhen the risk portfolio it goes up in value, that is when the investors should at least may wish to consider the possibility of ensuring a new, higher expected level of future income, by raising the guaranteed safety net and locking in those gains. This can be done by reallocating a portion of the risky portfolio to the riskless assets – that is, by adding to the safety-net portfolio. Doing so may forgo the possibility of even greater gains later in the level of future income. But it will assure the investor that the higher future income that the investor has come to expect from the due to risk portfolioy asset gains will not suddenly burst like a bubble and vanish.
A very simple process
When the investor adheres to a process like this, there is very little to do. Contrary to the hype that is usually heard from the finance industry establishment, this is actually the way it should be. Investing is for the long run. Warren Buffett himself, the investing icon, says that his favorite holding period for investments is “forever.” He has recently said you should “invest in stocks as you would in a farm.”
The only thing that should be done with the safety-net-plus investment strategy is to monitor and evaluate from time to time whether more assets should be moved from risky assets to safety-net assets, to lock in gains and raise the safety net. This process of monitoring and evaluating can be done by an automated service, which alerts the investor when the time is ripe for the possibility of the shift. This will happen after the equity market has substantially increased in value, so it is a strategy of selling high, but it is not done for the purpose of trying to time the market in order to beat it but for the purpose of ensuring the investor of the highest safety net floor on future income that is possible given the investor’s resources and future aspirations.
An example
Consider Paula. She is 39 years old and plans to work until she is 65 and then retire, earning nothing from work after that. She has accumulated $100,000 in assets so far. She plans to contribute $10,000 more to her portfolio each year until she is 65. These $10,000 contributions are in “real” dollars – that is, they are adjusted for inflation. In other words, she plans that her $10,000 contribution this year will increase by a percentage in future years to keep up with inflation.
Paula believes that in retirement, she will be able to live on a bare minimum of $4,000 a month. She anticipates that her Social Security payments will be $2,500 a month. So she needs/wants to guarantee that her safe investments will pay her at the very least $1,500 a month starting from her retirement in 26 years until she dies.
Paula is advised that she can accomplish this by investing 40% of her current assets, and 40% of each of her future contributions in TIPS. Most of these TIPS will mature 30 years from now when Paula is 69 years of age. At that point she will convert the proceeds of the maturing TIPS to an inflation-adjusted income annuity that will provide $1,500 a month, for the rest of her life.
The remaining 60% of her assets and contributions that are not invested in TIPS will be  are invested in the ultra-low-cost diversified U.S. or global equity portfolio.
Now suppose that 14 years from now, when Paula is 53 years of age, the stock market has just had a huge run-up and the value of her equity portfolio is now $500,000. This makes Paula believe that she will be able to withdraw much more than $1,500 a month from her investment assets after she is 65.
However, she knows that large run-ups in the stock market can be followed by sharp drops and that she could lose a large part or even all of her gains. If she now converted half of that $500,000 in risky assets to safe TIPS, it would guarantee her an income of at least $2,500 a month in inflation-adjusted dollars after retirement (for a total of $5,000/month along with social security) instead of the previously guaranteed $1,500 a month. And she would still have the upside income potential of the remaining $250,000 remaining in her risk portfolio of her investments – though she would give up any further upside potential that might have resulted be derived from the $250,000 that she decided to will shift to the safety net strategy securities.
Conclusion
A very simple investment strategy that involves almost no trading at all over a period of multiple decades and incurs the lowest costs possible can be used to both assure at least a minimum future income and offer the likelihood of much greater income. It can be adjusted periodically over time to lock in gains and increase guaranteed future income, in the process engaging in the desirable practice of selling on gains.