---
title: Tax-Loss Harvesting
position: 4
format_class: resource
section: resource-cards
no_date: true
status: current
lead: 'While increasingly touted, the math says it’s a yawn and it may even harm you.

'
source: internal
link: 
banner_img: "/uploads/taxlossharvesting-header2.png"
---

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:

**Some advisors claim to add value for their clients by engaging in daily or regular tax-loss harvesting. This is a practice in which the prices of clients’ investment securities are observed every day, and if one or more of those securities has declined sufficiently in price, it is sold to realize a capital loss for tax purposes. This loss can offset other capital gains realized in the same year by the investor, or it can be used to offset up to $3,000 a year of earned income. When a security is sold to harvest or “recognize” a loss, it is temporarily replaced in the portfolio by a similar security. After a period of 30 days has elapsed, the original security is normally repurchased in order to restore the original portfolio.**

**The tax is not avoided, however, but is only deferred. Tax will eventually have to be paid on the gain, except when securities are held until the investor’s death. The question is whether this practice enhances the investor’s long-term after-tax investment return.**

**Detailed simulations of investment results with and without daily tax-loss harvesting have been run. Their results show that if tax rates and rules remain the same over time then the practice of daily tax-loss harvesting can add, on average, about 15 to 20 hundredths of a percent to after-tax return. However, the practice also increases portfolio turnover by an average of 20% annually, increasing transaction costs. Furthermore, tax-loss harvesting adds accountancy and tax filing costs, and increases the complexity of the advisor’s software, augmenting programming error risk. And should tax rates be raised in the future, the tax-loss harvesting benefit could become negative. Additionally, daily tax-loss harvesting, as it is practiced, violates the intent of IRS rules designed to deter investors from trading securities solely to avoid taxes. On balance, we believe the costs and risks of daily tax-loss harvesting outweigh the minimal potential benefits.**


Until recently, nearly all investment managers claimed to add value by “beating the market” – by reaping investment returns higher than those of a market average like the Standard & Poors 500 index or other index. Decades of research studies, however, have compiled overwhelming evidence that beating the market average is, in general, not under investment managers’ control. It is almost always the result of chance events that they can neither predict nor control.

It has taken a long time for this message to trickle down to investors, even to the most supposedly sophisticated investors like administrators of pension funds and endowments and high-net-worth individuals. On the whole, in fact, the conclusion of the studies has had even more difficulty gaining traction with that group than with supposedly unsophisticated individual investors who do not have high net worths but are often more skeptical of financial expertise.

In recent years this message has finally begun to gain serious traction. As a result many financial advisors, and a new breed of advice-givers who provide web-based financial services – so-called “robo-advisors” – are recommending “passive” investing, which tries to match the investment results of a market average, instead of “active” investing, which tries to beat it.

As a result, these advisors still feel the need, at least for marketing purposes, to claim that they add value over and above what an investor could achieve by investing directly in passive index funds without an advisor.

**Enter tax loss harvesting**

Among those claims to add value – which include asset allocation and rebalancing, covered elsewhere – advisors claim to add value by harvesting investment losses so as to save investors money on taxes.

By following a detailed procedure, investors are allowed to net out short- and long-term investment gains and losses in their submissions to the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Hence, an investor might deliberately recognize a loss by selling a security that declined in price in order to offset an increase in price of another asset that was sold in the same year. Even if a tax loss is recognized that is greater than the sum of all investment gains realized by an investor in a given year, the investor can deduct $3,000 of that net loss from earned income during that year for tax purposes; any remaining loss can be carried over into future years. Thus, there appears to be a tax benefit to be derived from realizing a loss.

The benefit is not, however, undiluted. When the asset is sold, another asset must be purchased in its place. If the investor is to adhere to an investment plan – of the sort that is advocated by most advisors that practice tax-loss harvesting, i.e. an “asset allocation” – then the asset that is purchased must be similar to the one sold. The asset purchased in place of the sold asset, being similar, is likely also to have fallen in price. As a result, the so-called “cost basis” – the original purchase price – of the new asset will be lower than the original purchase price of the old asset. Tax will eventually have to be paid on this difference in purchase price – unless, if laws do not change, the new asset is held until the investor’s death. In current law, at the investor’s death the asset receives a “step-up” in its cost basis to its then-market value; hence, taxes on all capital gains to that date are foregone.

Therefore, the tax averted by tax loss harvesting is not a tax avoided, but only a tax deferred, unless the new asset is held until the investor’s death.

The question is, how much of an increase, if any, in overall after-tax investment return is gained by tax-loss harvesting?

**Routine year-end tax-loss harvesting**

As we have described in our paper on rebalancing, it is common for financial advisors and investment advisors to recommend to their clients that they “rebalance” their portfolios regularly in order to restore the asset allocation that the advisor initially recommended. This rebalancing typically occurs once a year, often at – or near – year-end.
Rebalancing entails the sale of some investment assets – generally those that have gained in value, or at least have not lost as much as others – and the purchase of other assets. Whenever assets are sold at a gain, a procedure is normally performed to minimize the capital gains taxes that result.
That part of the investor’s portfolio which is being sold was in all likelihood not purchased all at once. It might have been purchased in annual, or monthly installments, when deposits were made into the investor’s account. Thus, it was purchased in a series of “tax lots,” each at a different purchase price; that is, each tax lot has a different cost basis.
When these assets are sold, the standard tax-minimizing procedure is to sell the highest-cost tax lots first, in order to minimize the total capital gain and thus minimize the capital gains tax.
Daily tax-loss harvesting vs. year-end capital gains tax minimization
Some financial advisors and robo-advisors are now claiming that they can further reduce taxes, over and above these tax-limiting measures that normally occur once a year, by tracking asset prices daily and harvesting losses whenever sufficient losses are available to be harvested.
These advisors believe, however, that their clients must stick to the designated asset allocation. They use a limited number of low-cost passive investment vehicles to fulfill those allocations. Therefore, when the investor (or the advisor on the investor’s behalf) sells an investment vehicle that has declined in price – such as an index ETF (exchange-traded fund) – in order to harvest a loss for tax purposes, the investor must substitute an equivalent ETF to maintain the “integrity” of the investor’s asset allocation.
Since the original ETF, the one sold to harvest the loss, was presumably the preferred ETF because it was the one originally inserted into the investor’s portfolio, the substitute ETF is presumably only second-best. Thus, it is desirable to restore the original ETF as soon as possible in place of the substitute.
The IRS, however, imposes limits on when and how the investor can do that. The IRS’s rules are intended to discourage the trading of securities for no purpose other than tax avoidance. In pursuit of that intent, the IRS established the “Wash-Sale Rule.” That rule prohibits an investor from claiming a loss for tax purposes on the sale of a security if the investor subsequently, within 30 days of the sale, buys a “substantially similar” security.
This is, in essence, exactly what the purveyors of daily tax-loss harvesting claim to do for the investor. However, they argue that they have been able to identify substitutes for each passive index ETF that would not be considered “substantially similar” by the IRS, even though they are meant to be close substitutes for the ETF sold. Thus, they claim that these sales will be able to skirt the wash-sale rule, and the losses so harvested can be claimed for tax reduction purposes. After 30 days have elapsed from the original sale of the losing ETF and substitution of the similar one, the original ETF is repurchased to restore the exact mix of assets that was recommended in the first place.
Is this procedure for daily tax-loss harvesting effective in reducing the investor’s taxes, and if so, how effective is it?
Evaluation of daily tax-loss harvesting
This question has been addressed in a published article. The details are complex; we will only summarize the process of evaluation and the results here. Those who are interested in the complete details can read the article, as well as, if desired, the exchange that ensued with spokespersons for a robo-advisor that practices daily tax-loss harvesting.
The problem is to calculate the after-tax return on investment that would be obtained without daily tax-loss harvesting, and to compare it with the after-tax return on investment that would be obtained with daily tax-loss harvesting. This is a difficult problem. The comparison can be made only over an investor’s entire life, since one benefit of daily tax-loss harvesting (not directly to the investor, but to the investor’s heirs) would be to defer taxes until the investor’s death, at which point the capital gains taxes will be forgiven (if the step-up in cost basis is still the rule as of the investor’s death).
Some practitioners of daily tax-loss harvesting use inappropriate measures to make this comparison. And most, if not all do not fully reveal exactly how they make the comparison. The result is that many claims of benefits of daily tax-loss harvesting are wrong, or greatly exaggerated.
The measure that should be used to compare daily tax-loss harvesting with the alternative of only year-end tax minimization is the after-tax internal rate of return on investment (IRR) over the investor’s entire life. Since the length of the investor’s life is unknown, except with a probability (from actuarial tables), this can only be evaluated by using a probabilistic method such as Monte Carlo simulation. Furthermore, the exact pattern of gains and losses in the values of the securities traded can also be known only with a probability. This probabilistic pattern also lends itself to exploration with Monte Carlo simulation.
When a large number of Monte Carlo simulations were run, given a set of reasonable assumptions about the investments and their pretax returns, the result was that daily tax-loss harvesting adds on average only about 15-20 basis points (15 to 20 hundredths of a percent) over the investor’s life to the investor’s after-tax return.
The downsides of daily tax-loss harvesting
Offsetting at least in part the possible small benefits of daily tax-loss harvesting, the Monte Carlo simulations show that the procedure also increases the turnover of assets in the portfolio by about 20% a year. In the absence of daily tax-loss harvesting, the portfolio’s turnover would be less than 10% a year; daily tax-loss harvesting increases it to an average of almost 30% annually. This can mean greater transaction costs.
Furthermore, daily tax-loss harvesting may increase the investor’s costs for accounting and tax submission. In addition, the procedure adds considerable programming complexity. This is generally not directly the investor’s concern because the advisor performs this task for the investor. However, it increases the chances that something will go wrong with the advisor’s software and procedures – an ever-present danger that is too often overlooked.
More importantly, the calculations of the advantage of daily tax-loss harvesting make the assumption that tax rates and rules in the future will be the same as tax rules in the present. Since the future extends perhaps many decades over the investor’s entire life, this is a tenuous assumption. If tax rates stay the same or decline, then the investor will realize a small benefit, though it may be offset, as we have pointed out, by increased transaction and accountancy costs and software error risks.
But if tax rates increase in the future, the entire benefit of daily tax-loss harvesting could evaporate, and even become a negative benefit. This is a real possibility; thus, it poses a real risk.
Most importantly perhaps, the technique applied by advisors to create the tax losses that may be harvested on any day is in clear violation of the intent of the wash-sale rule – namely to deter trading of securities solely for tax avoidance purposes. This could, and should be regarded by investors and advisory clients (and for that matter by advisors themselves) as, at least, an ethical breach; possibly a legal breach if the IRS, however its opinions may lay out at present, decides in the future to regard these sales as not being exempt from the wash-sale rule.
Conclusion
Daily tax-loss harvesting should be viewed by investors as little more than a marketing tactic engaged in by some advisors to try to show that they add value. There is, in fact, likely to be little to show for it in terms of net increased after-tax return on investment, and it poses real risks. Furthermore, many advisors who market their daily tax-loss harvesting capabilities are prone to greatly exaggerate the benefit that this practice can provide to investors. For the reason of their disingenuous portrayal of the benefits at a minimum, advisors who purvey this benefit using exaggerated claims of “tax alpha” should be avoided.