---
title: Paying For The Sun To Rise
author: George Peacock
---

I have a confession.

For the past ten years or so, I have been paying an astronomer friend of mine to keep on eye on the sun and to make sure it rises.  
Specifically, I wish it would rise every day at 6:30 so I can plan my day accordingly. Now this may sound crazy but hear me out, because it’s been working.

He assures me that he is doing what he can to get the sun to rise and, moreover, to rise as close to 6:30 am as possible.  
He has historical charts of past sunrise times that seem helpful and he has a PhD; that is very reassuring.  Plus, he seems to do a 
very good job because although the time of sunrise fluctuates, it’s usually pretty close to 6:30 am, give or take.

It was pretty scary about a week ago, though, because there was a sudden change in the time of sunrise.  
Not a few minutes as seems pretty normal, but a full hour.  I felt much better after talking to him, though.  He assured me that 
though unusual, such “crashes” (astronomy jargon) are just part of the system and that if I kept paying him, we’d eventually get back to a 6:30 am sunrise.

I will say that sometimes the sun seems to have a mind of its own and begins rising earlier and earlier.  And other times it rises later 
and later.  But Kevin tells me that this is because of outside factors such as things called Mass and Gravity and even Time itself, and he 
assures me that he and his colleagues at the University are keeping a very close eye on it for me.  He even sent me a report that I couldn’t 
understand, but there were a lot of numbers and charts and it was written by people who clearly knew what they were talking about.

For the most part, this arrangement has worked out well for me.  After all, the sun continues to rise and that fact alone is paramount.  I wish the 
time of sunrise was less volatile and I could count on a 6:30 am start but I have learned to live with the uncertainty.

But At What Cost?

There is one thing that has been bothering me lately, though.  Kevin charges me 1% of my net worth every year to ensure that the sun rises 
and to reassure me whenever it rises a lot later than I would like. It seems expensive, but what do I know about gravity? And heat and light 
are really important to me.  And, besides, most of the other astronomers who work with my friends and colleague charge about the same thing.

But recently I saw an advertisement for a firm that has been around for a 30-40 years and they really seem to be in the vanguard of 
astronomical research.  They have had even better success than most astronomers and charge only .10% of my net worth!  That’s big savings.

Apparently, they have been able to get the sun to rise as well and at basically the same time as the other astronomers but have done so 
for 90% less cost.  One of their ads even suggested that the lower cost could result in my having more than twice as much money in my retirement 
accounts one day due to all the money I’d save.  I must admit that I am tempted.  After all, I 
[read that Warren Buffett](http://www.3simplerulesofinvesting.com/frankinsightoftheday/?p=208) put in his will that 
after his death his trustees should hire that vanguard firm.  And he seems to know as much as anyone about astronomy.

At the very least, maybe I’ll fire the other person who I hired for an additional 1% of my net worth.  I hired her to make sure that Kevin 
and his firm are the right astronomers for my personal situation.

George