---
title: Gobbledygook, Balderdash & Bafflegab — Wall Street’s Tower of Babel
date: 2016-03-11 00:00:00 Z
author: George Peacock
---

Nearly all financial and investment planning is based upon predictions about the future.  And “nearly” may even be an understatement.  After all, even actions that one takes right now are based upon assumptions about the future.

The problem is, of course, that the future is unknowable.  Should I invest in stocks or bonds or cash?  Should I worry about inflation?  What will tax rates be? Is this a good time or bad time to invest in X?

Nobel economist Friedrich Hayek said of his own profession: “The curious task of economics is to demonstrate to men how little they really know about what they imagine they can design.”  Or as some of my religious friends say more simply, “You want to make God laugh? Tell Him your plans.”

So one of the most healthy things we can do when setting about our planning is to simply realize that we are all making decisions in a framework of uncertainty and tradeoffs.  All of us; including our advisors.

But we really don’t like uncertainty, do we?  So we turn to the shamans of Wall Street and we listen to their magical incantations and stare with wonder at the precision of their potions models.

## HOW DO WALL STREET AND ADVISORS MAKE OUR DESIRES WORK FOR THEM?
Wall Street and financial advisors have constructed a world and language that Lord of the Rings author J.R.R. Tolkien would envy.  He brought Elves to life. Wall Street created “Quants.”  He invented languages. Wall Street borrowed from Greek and other languages to create a web of myths, tropes, bafflegab and gobbledygook. And now we bow down, mystified and in awe.

